[Music]
hello and welcome to your questions
answered on BBC News we call it yqa for
short uh we've been looking at what
you're searching for on the BBC website
about the Israel Gaza war and so for the
next few minutes we'll try and get you
some answers with our team of
correspondents so with me to answer some
of them our security correspondent Frank
Gardner and our Middle East analyst
Sebastian user nice to see you both
thank you for being here also joining us
our Middle East correspondent Tom bakan
who is in Jerusalem welcome to you too
as well Tom Frank let me start with you
because one of the most obvious
questions right now and we've had this
news confirmed that President Biden will
travel to um Israel why is he going what
can he do there this is incredibly
unusual it normally takes weeks if not
months of planning for a US president to
make an official visit like this the
Secret Service will deploy first weeks
in advance searching everywhere that
he's going to be with sniffer dogss
wrecking the route that he's going to
take for Air Force One to come in at
this critical Time Shows just how
seriously and how concerned the White
House is about this war spinning out of
out of control the US has two concerns
one is the fact that there are clearly a
huge amount of Civilian casualties that
these are not so-called surgical strikes
an awful expression but you know they
understand Israel's need to respond to
the atrocities that were committed in
southern Israel on on October the 7th
but they want Israel to show a bit of
restraint which it doesn't appear to be
showing much of at the moment and the
second is they're deeply worried about
it spinning out of control about it
sucking in drawing in other countries
notably Iran and its proxy force hasb in
southern Lebanon yeah let's talk to Tom
bman who's in Jerusalem and and Tom I
wonder how this will be viewed there um
how will this visit go down in
Jerusalem well it's going to be uh
absolutely critical for Benjamin
Netanyahu this visit because remember
actually before this uh crisis and War
Began Benjamin Netanyahu was in serious
political trouble this country had had
unprecedented uh protests for nearly a
year against his Hardline Ultra
nationalist government now in the course
of that Benjamin Netanyahu hadn't had an
invite to the White House as uh since he
was elected late last year and for
Israeli Prime Minister that was becoming
deeply embarrassing for him it was
leading to
lots of questions because Joe Biden was
uh basic basically pretty angry about
the uh Ultra nationalist makeup of
Benjamin netanyahu's government he
didn't like it he certainly didn't want
to reward Mr Netanyahu with a visit to
the White House so politically this is
really important in terms of sort of
bolstering what we now have is an
emergency wartime government in Israel
opposition figures have come in and this
is the most visible signal you can get
that Mr Biden is absolutely backing the
state of Israel
uh in a time of what they see as
historic crisis so it really matters and
as Frank was talking about those two
absolutely key objectives it's also a
signal to Iran you know we've heard the
rhetoric absolutely ratcheting up in the
last 24 hours from the Iranians talking
about the potential for you know a clear
escalation trying to deter an Israeli
ground Invasion uh into Gaza so this is
about security uh Global Security and
it's about the uh political support for
Israel at the moment Tom stay with us um
a few more questions to ask you uh over
the coming minutes but let me bring in
Sebastian at this point and and and Tom
raised the point there didn't it it's
this idea of you know um unconditional
support unequivocal support um does that
embolden Israel and and and I guess is
there a point when that starts to run
out that unconditional support I mean
emboldening Israel is one way of looking
I think uh in terms of the influence
that the US has on Israel I mean this
blows hot and cold to some extent I mean
what is true that whatever the nature of
a US Government whatever temporary
fallouts they may have within Israel as
as Tom was saying that as President
Biden has had with Netanyahu over the
past few months when it comes down to it
America stands 100% with Israel I mean
it sees Israel as essentially almost a
projection of itself in the Middle East
the only democracy in the Middle East as
they always like to say a sping the
values that the US Prides itself on uh
and is a key Ally regionally in all the
conflicts and and and and and problems
but that there are there conditions as
such I mean what the US has wanted to do
is to portray itself also as a
relatively evenhanded mediator between
Israel and the Palestinians in order
despite the slight hiccup when President
Trump was in power but over the past few
decades the two State solution at the
moment there's no real momentum in that
process whatsoever hasn't been for some
years but there's been talk about that
again all around from the US and beyond
that this could be an opportunity when
the war is over to look at that because
we've seen the abyss and this might be
the only way out of it so in terms of
conditionality there I mean the US has
criticized Israel most regularly about
the settlements the settlements I mean
clearly are seen internationally as the
biggest obstacle to any kind of peace to
any kind of setting up of of of two
states the way they've developed over
the past 20 years has meant that more
and more of a territory that would have
been Palestinian is now going to be more
and more difficult if there ever is a
resolution on that to actually hand it
over to remove the settlers so there
have been a lot of fallouts over that
and there's been more criticism over
that under the Biden Administration
certainly than we heard under President
Trump back more to what we are used to
but as I say when it comes down to it
and as Frank was saying there I mean
this is both about what President Biden
wants to achieve in the way this
conflict is is going but also wants to
make a huge gesture of solidarity with
the Israeli people um Frank on the other
side of this conflict is Hamas um and
interesting that warning coming from
Iran this morning saying that uh Israel
will not be allowed to act in the Gaza
Strip without consequences warn of
preemptive action they say in the coming
hours why is Iran such a backer of
Hamas um well both are dedicated to the
destruction of the state of Israel they
don't think that Israel should exist
even within its pre-1967 borders just to
be clear the Palestinian Authority which
rules in the West Bank out of
rala does believe in a two-state
solution is prepared to live side by
side with an Israeli State um Iran has
um funded supported trained armed
equipped a number of proxies around the
Middle East the most famous of being
Hezbollah in Lebanon which is not only a
military force but a political force it
is the strongest element the strongest
force in Lebanon if Iran and Hezbollah
decided the time was right then if
hasola was to unleash its arsenal of
missiles and Rockets on Israel then
Israel would find itself fighting a war
on two fronts in the south in Gaza and
in the North in Lebanon and these this
Arsenal is substantial Hezbollah are
probably better trained better equipped
better armed than Hamas the Israel
fought a war with them in 2006 I helped
cover out of Jerusalem and the Israelis
thought that they could win that war
just from the air and they couldn't they
went in on the ground with their maava
tanks and they got ambushed really
severely by hasbalah hasbalah really
gave them a bloody nose nobody won that
war it was unfinished business so that
would be a very serious blow um it's not
clear that hasbalah want to actually go
to war with them right now that's
exactly the the the the thing at the
moment that the skirmishes that are
happening on the border are remaining
within the sort of Rules of Engagement
between isra and HB hasb clearly wants
to send a signal but they're getting
more intense every single day I mean we
just had a few hours ago four people
trying to get across to plant an
explosive were killed by the Israelis
but they haven't said it wasb because
there's Palestinian factions at work
there as well and the one thing to say
about Hezbollah as you say there a huge
power within the leban state and they
look to that as well they're not just
looking towards Israel and what Iran
says they also have to think of
themselves as a rational player Within
Lebanese context which in a sense Reigns
them in a little more than say Hamas who
essentially own your answerable to
themselves don't forget that you've got
two US Navy um aircraft carrier strike
groups cruising just offshore in the
Eastern Mediterranean as a warning to
Iran and Syria possibly don't get
involved this is not your fight stay out
of it so that if Hezbollah did get
involved there is a risk that I think
that this would bring in the US Navy who
would start using their missiles and
their massive strike force of aircraft
to Target Hezbollah and which would
internationalize this whole conflict
yeah and that is really is the challenge
and when we get a sense of who are those
supporters around the world just just
bring us as a reminders Frank if you
will who is supporting Israel right now
well primarily Israel uh sorry primarily
the United States as its closest Ally
but also most western Nations have given
it rhetorical support um often mixed
with humanitarian aid for the
Palestinians so Britain for example is
giving $10 million of aid but is
politically supporting Israel because of
the the sheer barbarity and extent of
that attack on October the 7th that
Saturday morning um you know the the
similarities with Isis but that said
Western countries are now getting very
concerned about the appalling death toll
and the casualties and the misery
inflicted in Gaza by Israeli air strikes
and the blockade I I remind you people
are watching your questions answer these
are the questions that people are
submitting online there's much more
detail on all of these stories on BBC
News online bbc.com
newws and let's talk and let me bring
back in Tom who's in Jerusalem and um
Tom let's talk about what happens next
one of the questions that's being asked
a lot online is has Israel ever lost a
war and that could be a significant
question going
forward well it's quite a hard question
to answer that because there are those
who would say inside and outside of
Israel that in a sense Israel always
feels itself War ever ever since its
foundation in
1948 uh as a new Jewish state in this
wider Arab region there have been many
Arab Israeli Wars State on state between
Arab neighbors and the Israelis and also
since 1967 Israel's occupation of the
Palestinian territory so those
Palestinians have lived under occupation
they will say they feel like this is a
sort of ongoing war and in a sense the
internally the front lines of that sort
of move around it's never uh
particularly
calm but in terms of traditional War I
mean Frank mentioned uh 2006 where
Hezbollah claimed a victory um you know
you had uh after uh Israel had withdrawn
from Southern Lebanon in 2000 and
elements of that from right back to 1982
uh Israel's invasion of uh Lebanon and
driving the PLO yasa arafat's PLO out of
Beirut elements of that were deeply
unpopular among um Israelis but I think
probably the most sort of qualified
military failure that's always seen
historically by Israelis is the 1973 yum
kipor War now this was when uh the
Egyptians and the syrians launched a
sneak attack and in some senses you know
this was 50 years ago this month it's
had this huge resonance with the Hamas
uh attack and the atrocities of this
week which were so unexpected on a sort
of historical level many people have
thought back to what happened uh in the
yapor War of 1973 although again that
was states that was armies against
armies it didn't have this same sense of
you know civilians being the uh rather
the very sort of atrocious Target of
much of this um but that's often seen as
a big failure by Israel a failure of
intelligence although they drove back
the Egyptians and the syrians and retook
the territories that they had already
occupied in the Goan Heights and the sin
it led in effect years later to a a
peace treaty and a territorial with
retreat by the Israelis Tom really good
to have you there thank you uh and
Sebastian let me ask you this quickly um
it seems maybe perhaps to talk about
people just visiting the region perhaps
on holiday but it's important is it safe
is the question that people are
searching for online can they visit the
region maybe to Egypt for example or to
other countries that are near Israel and
Gaza um I mean I think to Egypt and what
you're not going to see and and as was
essentially being explained by Tom there
you you're not going to see Arab states
themselves involved in a direct walk
with Israel over this and Egypt Jordan
you know the countries that are nearest
they're safe but you are going to be in
a very fevered frenzy time there's going
to be lots of protests there's going to
be you know unrest on the streets
definitely which will build as this goes
on so in major cities you'd have to
think carefully about whether you wanted
to be there Lebanon I mean from my
friends from people there I mean people
are leaving Lebanon like nobody's
business strangely enough they were
talking about this several weeks before
this happened they were saying we're
expecting something big to happen don't
come to Lebanon this year and people are
not going uh Sebastian Frank really good
to have you both with us and thank you
of course to Tom bman who was in
Jerusalem for us you are watching BBC
[Music]
News